design_docs/configuration-audit.md, before:

# Configuration Audit: Hardcoded Constants & User Preference Candidates

## Goal

Document all hardcoded constants in the codebase, categorize them, and identify candidates for:

1. Centralized system configuration
2. User-configurable preferences (future work)

---

## Python Backend Constants

### Category 1: Immutable Science Constants (DO NOT CHANGE)

These are from peer-reviewed circadian research. Changing breaks the Forger99 model.

| File                        | Constant              | Value                     | Source                      |
| --------------------------- | --------------------- | ------------------------- | --------------------------- |
| `markers.py:23-25`          | `CBTMIN_BEFORE_WAKE`  | 2.5h                      | Czeisler & Gooley 2007      |
|                             | `DLMO_BEFORE_SLEEP`   | 2.0h                      | Burgess et al. 2010         |
|                             | `DLMO_TO_CBTMIN`      | 6.0h                      | Core circadian relationship |
| `prc.py:30-40`              | Light PRC zones       | 0-4h advance, -4-0h delay | Khalsa 2003                 |
|                             | `MAX_ADVANCE_PER_DAY` | 2.0h                      | Khalsa 2003                 |
|                             | `MAX_DELAY_PER_DAY`   | 3.4h                      | Khalsa 2003                 |
| `prc.py:165-170`            | Melatonin PRC         | -5h advance, +10h delay   | Burgess 2010                |
| `sleep_pressure.py:24-31`   | Two-Process Model     | 90min cycles, 16h wake    | Borbély                     |
| `shift_calculator.py:36-40` | Shift rate limits     | 1.0-2.0h/day              | Physiological limits        |

### Category 2: Algorithm Configuration (Could Centralize)

System behavior that could move to a config file.

| File                         | Constant                              | Value    | Purpose                                |
| ---------------------------- | ------------------------------------- | -------- | -------------------------------------- |
| `phase_generator.py:32`      | `PRE_DEPARTURE_BUFFER_HOURS`          | 3.0      | Airport arrival buffer                 |
| `phase_generator.py:33`      | `ULR_FLIGHT_THRESHOLD_HOURS`          | 12.0     | Ultra-long-range flight classification |
| `phase_generator.py:145-147` | Layover thresholds                    | 48h, 96h | Multi-leg strategy                     |
| `constraint_filter.py:20`    | `SLEEP_TARGET_DEPARTURE_BUFFER_HOURS` | 4.0      | Filter sleep targets near departure    |
| `constraint_filter.py:187`   | Early morning threshold               | 6h       | Arrival filtering                      |
| `scheduler_v2.py:203`        | Past intervention buffer              | 30min    | Grace period for filtering             |

### Category 3: User Preference Candidates

**Priority items for future user settings:**

#### Light Exposure Duration

| File                          | Value                | Current | Range      | Notes                      |
| ----------------------------- | -------------------- | ------- | ---------- | -------------------------- |
| `prc.py:46`                   | Default duration     | 60 min  | 30-120 min | Research supports variable |
| `intervention_planner.py:251` | Short phase duration | 30 min  | 15-60 min  | Quick interventions        |
| `intervention_planner.py:347` | Standard duration    | 60 min  | 30-120 min | Main light exposure        |

#### Caffeine Cutoff

| File                          | Value               | Current       | Range               | Notes         |
| ----------------------------- | ------------------- | ------------- | ------------------- | ------------- |
| `intervention_planner.py:502` | Cutoff before sleep | 600 min (10h) | 480-720 min (8-12h) | Half-life ~6h |

#### Nap Settings

| File                          | Value                   | Current         | Range      | Notes                 |
| ----------------------------- | ----------------------- | --------------- | ---------- | --------------------- |
| `sleep_pressure.py:34-37`     | Nap window start/end    | 30-50% into day | 25-60%     | When naps are allowed |
| `sleep_pressure.py:144`       | Max nap (high debt)     | 90 min          | 60-120 min | One sleep cycle       |
| `sleep_pressure.py:149`       | Max nap (standard)      | 30 min          | 20-45 min  | Avoid inertia         |
| `sleep_pressure.py:194`       | Arrival nap cutoff      | 13:00           | Flexible   | Hard limit time       |
| `sleep_pressure.py:208`       | Settle-in after arrival | 45 min          | 30-90 min  | Rest before nap       |
| `sleep_pressure.py:219-221`   | Debt thresholds         | 5h/3h           | Adjustable | Nap urgency triggers  |
| `intervention_planner.py:538` | Default sleep debt      | 4.0h            | 2-6h       | Red-eye assumption    |

#### Melatonin Dose

| File                              | Value | Current | Range   | Notes                    |
| --------------------------------- | ----- | ------- | ------- | ------------------------ |
| `intervention_planner.py:447,470` | Dose  | 0.5mg   | 0.3-3mg | Burgess recommends 0.5mg |

---

## TypeScript Frontend Constants

### Already Centralized

**File:** `src/types/trip-form.ts:39-51`

```typescript
export const defaultFormState: TripFormState = {
  wakeTime: "07:00", // User preference
  sleepTime: "22:00", // User preference
  prepDays: 3, // User preference
  useMelatonin: true, // User preference
  useCaffeine: true, // User preference
  useExercise: false, // User preference
  napPreference: "flight_only", // User preference
};
```

### Could Centralize

| File                  | Value      | Purpose                    |
| --------------------- | ---------- | -------------------------- |
| `time-select.tsx:32`  | 15 min     | Time picker increment      |
| `trip-form.tsx:74-79` | +2/+3 days | Demo date offsets          |
| `route.ts:179`        | 30000ms    | API timeout                |
| `route.ts:82`         | 1-7        | Prep days validation range |
| `day-section.tsx:48`  | 6h         | Late-night sleep threshold |

### Design System (Intervention Colors)

Already well-organized in `intervention-utils.ts:11-107` with `getInterventionStyle()`.

---

## Database Schema (Existing User Preferences)

From `prisma/schema.prisma`, users table already has:

```prisma
default_prep_days     Int       @default(3)
default_wake_time     String    @default("07:00")
default_sleep_time    String    @default("23:00")
uses_melatonin        Boolean   @default(true)
uses_caffeine         Boolean   @default(true)
nap_preference        String    @default("flight_only")
```

**Missing from schema (future additions):**

- `light_exposure_minutes` (default 60)
- `caffeine_cutoff_hours` (default 10)
- `max_nap_minutes` (default 30)
- `max_nap_with_debt_minutes` (default 90)
- `arrival_nap_cutoff_time` (default "13:00")
- `melatonin_dose_mg` (default 0.5)

---

## Recommended Future Config Structure

### Python: `api/_python/circadian/config/`

```
config/
├── science.py          # Immutable PRC/marker constants
├── algorithm.py        # System behavior (buffers, thresholds)
└── defaults.py         # Default user preferences
```

### TypeScript: `src/config/`

```
config/
├── constants.ts        # System constants (timeouts, increments)
├── defaults.ts         # Default form values (merge with trip-form.ts)
└── design-tokens.ts    # Colors, spacing (optional)
```

---

## Summary

| Category          | Count | Action                                         |
| ----------------- | ----- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| Immutable Science | ~28   | Leave as-is, document sources                  |
| Algorithm Config  | ~10   | Could centralize (low priority)                |
| User Preferences  | ~15   | Add to DB schema + settings UI (high priority) |
| Frontend Defaults | ~7    | Already mostly centralized                     |

**Priority User Preferences to Add:**

1. Light exposure duration (30-120 min)
2. Caffeine cutoff (8-12h before sleep)
3. Nap settings (duration, windows, cutoff)
4. Melatonin dose (0.3-3mg)

Commit message:

Document intensity config duplication in configuration audit
The schedule intensity rates are documented in comments in types.py
(lines 86-90) and also as actual code in shift_calculator.py's
INTENSITY_CONFIGS dict. This soft duplication could lead to drift.

Added a "Configuration Duplication Issues" section with recommended
fixes to consolidate the source of truth.

design_docs/configuration-audit.md, after:

# Configuration Audit: Hardcoded Constants & User Preference Candidates

## Goal

Document all hardcoded constants in the codebase, categorize them, and identify candidates for:

1. Centralized system configuration
2. User-configurable preferences (future work)

---

## Python Backend Constants

### Category 1: Immutable Science Constants (DO NOT CHANGE)

These are from peer-reviewed circadian research. Changing breaks the Forger99 model.

| File                        | Constant              | Value                     | Source                      |
| --------------------------- | --------------------- | ------------------------- | --------------------------- |
| `markers.py:23-25`          | `CBTMIN_BEFORE_WAKE`  | 2.5h                      | Czeisler & Gooley 2007      |
|                             | `DLMO_BEFORE_SLEEP`   | 2.0h                      | Burgess et al. 2010         |
|                             | `DLMO_TO_CBTMIN`      | 6.0h                      | Core circadian relationship |
| `prc.py:30-40`              | Light PRC zones       | 0-4h advance, -4-0h delay | Khalsa 2003                 |
|                             | `MAX_ADVANCE_PER_DAY` | 2.0h                      | Khalsa 2003                 |
|                             | `MAX_DELAY_PER_DAY`   | 3.4h                      | Khalsa 2003                 |
| `prc.py:165-170`            | Melatonin PRC         | -5h advance, +10h delay   | Burgess 2010                |
| `sleep_pressure.py:24-31`   | Two-Process Model     | 90min cycles, 16h wake    | Borbély                     |
| `shift_calculator.py:36-40` | Shift rate limits     | 1.0-2.0h/day              | Physiological limits        |

### Category 2: Algorithm Configuration (Could Centralize)

System behavior that could move to a config file.

| File                         | Constant                              | Value    | Purpose                                |
| ---------------------------- | ------------------------------------- | -------- | -------------------------------------- |
| `phase_generator.py:32`      | `PRE_DEPARTURE_BUFFER_HOURS`          | 3.0      | Airport arrival buffer                 |
| `phase_generator.py:33`      | `ULR_FLIGHT_THRESHOLD_HOURS`          | 12.0     | Ultra-long-range flight classification |
| `phase_generator.py:145-147` | Layover thresholds                    | 48h, 96h | Multi-leg strategy                     |
| `constraint_filter.py:20`    | `SLEEP_TARGET_DEPARTURE_BUFFER_HOURS` | 4.0      | Filter sleep targets near departure    |
| `constraint_filter.py:187`   | Early morning threshold               | 6h       | Arrival filtering                      |
| `scheduler_v2.py:203`        | Past intervention buffer              | 30min    | Grace period for filtering             |

### Category 3: User Preference Candidates

**Priority items for future user settings:**

#### Light Exposure Duration

| File                          | Value                | Current | Range      | Notes                      |
| ----------------------------- | -------------------- | ------- | ---------- | -------------------------- |
| `prc.py:46`                   | Default duration     | 60 min  | 30-120 min | Research supports variable |
| `intervention_planner.py:251` | Short phase duration | 30 min  | 15-60 min  | Quick interventions        |
| `intervention_planner.py:347` | Standard duration    | 60 min  | 30-120 min | Main light exposure        |

#### Caffeine Cutoff

| File                          | Value               | Current       | Range               | Notes         |
| ----------------------------- | ------------------- | ------------- | ------------------- | ------------- |
| `intervention_planner.py:502` | Cutoff before sleep | 600 min (10h) | 480-720 min (8-12h) | Half-life ~6h |

#### Nap Settings

| File                          | Value                   | Current         | Range      | Notes                 |
| ----------------------------- | ----------------------- | --------------- | ---------- | --------------------- |
| `sleep_pressure.py:34-37`     | Nap window start/end    | 30-50% into day | 25-60%     | When naps are allowed |
| `sleep_pressure.py:144`       | Max nap (high debt)     | 90 min          | 60-120 min | One sleep cycle       |
| `sleep_pressure.py:149`       | Max nap (standard)      | 30 min          | 20-45 min  | Avoid inertia         |
| `sleep_pressure.py:194`       | Arrival nap cutoff      | 13:00           | Flexible   | Hard limit time       |
| `sleep_pressure.py:208`       | Settle-in after arrival | 45 min          | 30-90 min  | Rest before nap       |
| `sleep_pressure.py:219-221`   | Debt thresholds         | 5h/3h           | Adjustable | Nap urgency triggers  |
| `intervention_planner.py:538` | Default sleep debt      | 4.0h            | 2-6h       | Red-eye assumption    |

#### Melatonin Dose

| File                              | Value | Current | Range   | Notes                    |
| --------------------------------- | ----- | ------- | ------- | ------------------------ |
| `intervention_planner.py:447,470` | Dose  | 0.5mg   | 0.3-3mg | Burgess recommends 0.5mg |

---

## TypeScript Frontend Constants

### Already Centralized

**File:** `src/types/trip-form.ts:39-51`

```typescript
export const defaultFormState: TripFormState = {
  wakeTime: "07:00", // User preference
  sleepTime: "22:00", // User preference
  prepDays: 3, // User preference
  useMelatonin: true, // User preference
  useCaffeine: true, // User preference
  useExercise: false, // User preference
  napPreference: "flight_only", // User preference
};
```

### Could Centralize

| File                  | Value      | Purpose                    |
| --------------------- | ---------- | -------------------------- |
| `time-select.tsx:32`  | 15 min     | Time picker increment      |
| `trip-form.tsx:74-79` | +2/+3 days | Demo date offsets          |
| `route.ts:179`        | 30000ms    | API timeout                |
| `route.ts:82`         | 1-7        | Prep days validation range |
| `day-section.tsx:48`  | 6h         | Late-night sleep threshold |

### Design System (Intervention Colors)

Already well-organized in `intervention-utils.ts:11-107` with `getInterventionStyle()`.

---

## Database Schema (Existing User Preferences)

From `prisma/schema.prisma`, users table already has:

```prisma
default_prep_days     Int       @default(3)
default_wake_time     String    @default("07:00")
default_sleep_time    String    @default("23:00")
uses_melatonin        Boolean   @default(true)
uses_caffeine         Boolean   @default(true)
nap_preference        String    @default("flight_only")
```

**Missing from schema (future additions):**

- `light_exposure_minutes` (default 60)
- `caffeine_cutoff_hours` (default 10)
- `max_nap_minutes` (default 30)
- `max_nap_with_debt_minutes` (default 90)
- `arrival_nap_cutoff_time` (default "13:00")
- `melatonin_dose_mg` (default 0.5)

---

## Recommended Future Config Structure

### Python: `api/_python/circadian/config/`

```
config/
├── science.py          # Immutable PRC/marker constants
├── algorithm.py        # System behavior (buffers, thresholds)
└── defaults.py         # Default user preferences
```

### TypeScript: `src/config/`

```
config/
├── constants.ts        # System constants (timeouts, increments)
├── defaults.ts         # Default form values (merge with trip-form.ts)
└── design-tokens.ts    # Colors, spacing (optional)
```

---

## Configuration Duplication Issues

### Intensity Rates (Soft Duplication)

The schedule intensity rates appear in two places:

| Location                          | Type          | Content                                                                      |
| --------------------------------- | ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `types.py:86-90`                  | Comments      | `# - gentle: 0.75h/day advance, 1.0h/day delay`                              |
| `shift_calculator.py:51-64`       | Code          | `INTENSITY_CONFIGS` dict with actual values                                  |
| `test_realistic_flights.py:1427`  | Test comments | Same rates documented                                                        |
| `test_shift_rates.py:36-38`       | Test comments | Same rates documented                                                        |

**Risk:** Comments in `types.py` could drift out of sync with the actual `INTENSITY_CONFIGS` values.

**Recommended fix:** Either:
1. Remove the rates from `types.py` comments and reference `shift_calculator.py` as source of truth
2. Or add a cross-reference comment: `# See INTENSITY_CONFIGS in shift_calculator.py for current values`

---

## Summary

| Category          | Count | Action                                         |
| ----------------- | ----- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| Immutable Science | ~28   | Leave as-is, document sources                  |
| Algorithm Config  | ~10   | Could centralize (low priority)                |
| User Preferences  | ~15   | Add to DB schema + settings UI (high priority) |
| Frontend Defaults | ~7    | Already mostly centralized                     |
| Duplication       | 1     | Fix soft duplication in intensity rates        |

**Priority User Preferences to Add:**

1. Light exposure duration (30-120 min)
2. Caffeine cutoff (8-12h before sleep)
3. Nap settings (duration, windows, cutoff)
4. Melatonin dose (0.3-3mg)
